Add post for `ratatui 0.23.0` (#21)
orhun/personal-blog: content/ratatui-0.23.0.md

+++
title = "From tui-rs to Ratatui: 6 Months of Cooking Up Rust TUIs"
date = 2023-08-28

[taxonomies]
categories = ["Ratatui"]
+++

Let's take a look at what is new in the new version of "[**Ratatui**](https://github.com/ratatui-org/ratatui)" and how it became the successor of [`tui-rs`](https://github.com/fdehau/tui-rs).

<!-- more -->

<center>

> ![ratatui](/ratatui-logo.png)

Reviewer: The logo isn't rendering for me.

Author: Yup, need to run it with `zola serve`.

![horizontal bars](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/15311024/263077132-ff80b2c4-9d2d-480b-9a72-f3779688bec8.png)

---

### Voluntary skipping capability for Sixel

> [Sixel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sixel) is a bitmap graphics format supported by terminals.
> "Sixel mode" is entered by sending the sequence `ESC+Pq`.
> The "String Terminator" sequence `ESC+\` exits the mode.

`Cell` widget now has a `set_skip` method that allows the cell to be skipped when copying (diffing) the buffer to the screen. This is helpful when it is necessary to prevent the buffer from overwriting a cell that is covered by an image from some terminal graphics protocol such as Sixel, iTerm, Kitty, etc.

See the pull request for more information: [https://github.com/ratatui-org/ratatui/pull/215](https://github.com/ratatui-org/ratatui/pull/215)

In this context, there is also an experimental image rendering crate: [_ratatu-image_](https://github.com/benjajaja/ratatu-image)

![ratatu-image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/benjajaja/ratatu-image/master/assets/Recording.gif)

---

### Table/List: Highlight spacing

> We added a new property called `HightlightSpacing` to the `Table` and `List` widgets and it can be optionally set via calling `hightlight_spacing` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We added a new property called `HighlightSpacing` to the `Table` and `List` widgets and it can be optionally set via calling `highlight_spacing` function.
```

Author: Good catch, thanks!

    .highlight_spacing(HighlightSpacing::Always);
```

Right now, there are 3 variants:

- `Always`: Always add spacing for the selection symbol column.
- `WhenSelected`: Only add spacing for the selection symbol column if a row is selected.
- `Never`: Never add spacing to the selection symbol column, regardless of whether something is selected or not.

---

### Table: support line alignment

```rs
let table = Table::new(vec![
        Row::new(vec![Line::from("Left").alignment(Alignment::Left)]),
        Row::new(vec![Line::from("Center").alignment(Alignment::Center)]),
        Row::new(vec![Line::from("Right").alignment(Alignment::Right)]),
    ])
    .widths(&[Constraint::Percentage(100)]);
```

Now results in:

```text
Left
       Center
               Right
```

---

### Scrollbar: optional track symbol

The track symbol in the `Scrollbar` is now optional, simplifying composition with other widgets. It also makes it easier to use the `Scrollbar` in tandem with a block with special block characters.

One breaking change is that `track_symbol` needs to be set in the following way now:

```rs
let scrollbar = Scrollbar::default().track_symbol(Some("-"));

> ```

Reviewer: Can you make a diff between the previous version and this?

Author: Sure, done

We also host these GIFs at [https://vhs.charm.sh](https://vhs.charm.sh) but there is an issue about moving everything to GitHub. If you are interested in contributing regarding this, see [https://github.com/ratatui-org/ratatui/issues/401](https://github.com/ratatui-org/ratatui/issues/401)

---

### Common traits

With the help of [strum](https://crates.io/crates/strum) crate, we added `Display` and `FromStr` implementation to enum types.

Also, we implemented common traits such as `Debug`, `Default`, `Clone`, `Copy`, `Eq`, `PartialEq`, `Ord`, `PartialOrd`, `Hash` to the structs/enums where possible.

---

### Test coverage 🧪

`ratatui` now has [90% test coverage](https://app.codecov.io/gh/ratatui-org/ratatui)!

Shoutout to everyone who added tests/benchmarks for various widgets made this possible.

---

### No unsafe ⚠️

We now _forbid_ [unsafe code](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch19-01-unsafe-rust.html) in `ratatui`. Also, see [this discussion](https://github.com/ratatui-org/ratatui/discussions/66) we had in the past about using `unsafe` code for optimization purposes.

---

### The book 📕

> We created a book for more in-depth `ratatui` documentation and usage examples, you can read it from here: [https://ratatui-org.github.io/ratatui-book/](https://ratatui-org.github.io/ratatui-book/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are working on a book for more in-depth `ratatui` documentation and usage examples, you can read it from here: [https://ratatui-org.github.io/ratatui-book/](https://ratatui-org.github.io/ratatui-book/)
```
